Now that we've given an overview
of the internals of streams,
we're going to start
going a little deeper
into the Spliterators
capabilities,
and what we'll do here is
talk about the structure
and the functionality of these
Spliterators, which is just
some sort of a funny combination
of the phrase splittable
iterators.
So a Spliterator, or
splittable iterator,
was a new type
that was initially
introduced into Java
8, and, of course,
it's been there ever since.
It combines two different
capabilities, iterating,
on one hand, and
splitting on the other.
So for iterating, you
can use a Spliterator
to traverse the elements
of a source, where
the source could be a
collection, an array, and so
on.
And this example we're
going to look at here
is in my ex13 folder in
my GitHub repository.
In this particular
case, the source
is an array which converts
into a list of strings
with a famous Shakespeare quote.
What we do is we take
the quote object, which
is a list of
strings, and we say,
hey, quote, spliterate yourself,
so we say quote.spliterator,
and that returns a Spliterator
of type string, which we name s
for this example.
So now what we're going to do
is now that we've got ourselves
a Spliterator, we're going to
call the tryAdvance method,
and tryAdvance is a method
that basically combines
the hasNext() and next()
methods of iterator.
But unlike iterator, where
you have to call two methods,
the Spliterator tryAdvance
only requires one method,
and the reason for
that is that you
are going to be able to get
a return value that indicates
whether to keep going or not.
Here is essentially what
tryAdvance looks like.
In this case, this is the
tryAdvance method for the array
list implementation.
So if there are no more elements
remaining, then we're done.
Otherwise, we're going to
accept this action, which
is passed in as a
parameter, tryAdvance,
on the next element
in the array list.
The action that we're going
to pass in in this case
is going to be a method
reference to the print
method defined on the
System.out object,
and that's going
to print the value
of each string in the quotes.
We'll print out all the
values of the quote.
So that's iteration.
It's basically a little
bit spiffier iterator,
without two methods
but one, so it's
arguably a little bit
better, but that's
not why we have
Spliterators, quite frankly.
The real benefit
of Spliterators is
to be used to partition
the elements of a source
by splitting them.
Now, I'm going to show
you a simple example
here just to
illustrate the concept,
but please be aware that this
gets a lot more interesting
when we have parallel streams.
So just to show the concept,
let's say we start out
with our original quote object,
and we say, quote.spliterator,
and that's going to return to
us a Spliterator that initially
splits the entire array list.
It covers the entire array
list, and we store that
into an object, into a
variable, called secondHalf,
for reasons that'll
become clear, hopefully,
in just a moment.
And then we say,
hey, secondHalf,
try to split yourself, please.
And what trySplit does is it
returns a new Spliterator that
covers the elements in the
original Spliterator that
will no longer be covered.
Now again, that
sounds a little weird,
but what that means is is
we're going to basically split
the original Spliterator, the
one called secondHalf, in half,
and the secondHalf Spliterator,
as the name implies,
will now cover the
elements that are
from the middle to the
end of the original list.
And the result, the Spliterator
return from triSplit,
will be the
firstHalf, which will
be from the beginning of
the list up to the point
where we split it in half.
So now we have two Spliterators,
firstHalf and secondHalf,
and if you take a
look here at trySplit,
you can see what it does.
It basically checks
to see if the input is
smaller than some minimum.
If so, we return null.
We don't split at all.
And if the Spliterator is
not below a minimum size
or equal to a minimum
size, we split the input up
into two chunks.
We update the right-hand
chunk to be us,
so we're going to cover
the right-hand chunk,
and then we create
a new Spliterator
to cover the left-hand chunk,
so that's basically what
trySplit does in this case.
And the way that this works with
parallel streams, of course,
is that we recursively or
we-- the stream's framework
recursively calls trySplit
until the chunks are less than
or equal to the minimum
size, so it basically creates
a tree of recursive calls.
And all of these things that are
split up for parallel streams
will end up being placed
into the common fork
join pool to be
executed in parallel,
but we'll come to that later
Ideally, a Spliterator should
split the original input source
evenly in half, so we'd
like it to split it
like taking a candy bar
and breaking it in half
and giving one-half
to your friend
and then keeping the
equal-sized part for yourself,
so we can split things in half.
The right chunk,
as you can see, is
defined by simply updating
the state of this Spliterator
object.
The left-hand chunk is
identified or defined
by creating and returning a
new Spliterator object that
covers the left-hand part.
So after trySplit
is called, we now
have two Spliterators that are
hopefully about the same size.
And for certain data
structures, as we'll see,
we also want to be
able to split things up
very efficiently
and very quickly,
and I'll talk about that a
little bit later when we talk
about the overhead of
different Spliterators
as it pertains to
parallel streams,
and this will come
up in later weeks.
So that we've got ourselves with
two Spliterators, a firstHalf
and a secondHalf, we
can perform the action
for each element
in the Spliterator.
So the forEachRemaining
method will take an action,
and for every element
that's in the Spliterator,
it will apply that action to
the element in that Spliterator.
So as you can see here,
what we're going to do
is we're going to print out all
the strings in the firstHalf,
the ones that say this
above all thine, probably,
depedning on where it's
split, and then we're
going to go ahead and call
secondHalf.forEachRemaining,
passing in the print method
reference, and that would say,
own self be true,
new line, assuming
that that's how it split.
So as you can see
here, we're going
to use this Spliterator in
a somewhat contrived manner
in order to break the input
quote up into two chunks
and then do something
with them-- in this case,
print them.
Now as I mentioned before,
this is really not that useful,
the splitting is
not that useful,
until you use Java
parallel streams, which
came along in Java 8.
And then it gets
really interesting
because that's exactly
how parallel streams works
to decompose the
original input source up
into these sub-sources
or sub-chunks,
and then it goes ahead and
runs those things in parallel
and then joins the
results back together,
so then it becomes extremely
useful and extremely powerful.
For right now, for this part
of the lesson, for this week,
we're just going to focus
on the traversal phase using
the iteration part,
and we'll talk later
about partitioning
when we cover parallel
streams in a lot more detail.
And you'll get a
chance to see how
to write a parallel Spliterator
using the trySplit method,
and this is a really cool,
really sophisticated example
I think you'll have a lot
of fun learning about.
Now, just to kind of wrap up
this discussion of Spliterator,
it's important to
understand the capabilities
of the StreamSupport.stream
factory method,
and this is used to create
a new stream, either
a sequential stream
or a parallel stream,
from a Spliterator, and
here's basically how it works.
The collection interface defines
a couple of default methods.
Hopefully, you remember
that with Java 8
and beyond, an interface can
now have default methods.
Before, you couldn't have
any methods in interface
that were--
you couldn't have methods.
You could just have
method signatures but not
method implementations.
With Java 8 and beyond,
you can have default method
implementations.
So we have default
method implementations
for stream and
parallel stream, which
get inherited by all the
different collections
in the Java
Collections framework.
And if you look carefully,
you can see what they do.
Under the hood, they use the
StreamSupport.stream helper
method, which is a factory
method, to do two things,
depending on whether you're
stream or parallel stream.
If you're stream, then
the Spliterator method
is called, which is also, of
course, defined in Collection
and could be customized
by implementations
of the Collection interface,
like ArrayList or HashMap
and whatnot.
And likewise, in addition
to calling the Spliterator
method to get a Spliterator,
we passed the false flag
to StreamSupport.stream,
and what that does
is that instructs
StreamSupport.stream
to create a sequential stream.
Conversely, for parallel
stream, mostly the same,
except in this case, we say
StreamSupport.stream passing
in the Spliterator, the
result of the Spliterator,
and we pass true in this
case, and what true says
is, please go ahead and
meet me a parallel stream.
So hopefully, this
gives you a sense
of how Spliterators relate
to creating streams.
You need Spliterators
in order to be
able to tell the Spliterator
framework in the Java Streams
framework how to split
things up into the chunks
and whether to create a
stream that runs in parallel
or runs sequentially.